THE DANCER

Buried beneath a great dark palm,
Wan as the last grey gleam of day,
Brooded the dancer; on her arm
Her face like some cold frostflower lay.
Her bodice scarcely seemed to stir
Above her wintry breasts of snow;
So cold Diana's draperies were,
Fashioned by Phidias long ago.
It seemed the marble slab, that still
Stood tenantless, must yearn to call
And lure her to arise and fill
Its long deserted pedestal.
So Anguish chills. Weighted, her heart
Seemed scarce to beat; her eyes beheld
Only the vanished joy her art
By its own power had dispelled.
Without, the voices throbbed or failed,
Or broke in song; no echo came
To where the spent, white dancer quailed
And dwelt upon her lover's shame.
His lips had framed last night the word
His eyes had asked her long ago,
When only quivering pulses stirred
To answer that it might be so.
To-night she came to lay before
His feet her sheaf of wisdom, grown
Through eager years, her hard-won lore,
To crown his great love with her own.
All the dark days had held of pain
Should lift her up, she dreamed, more fair,
As tender birches bent with rain
Rise into stainless upper air.
For her to-night the House of Mirth
Became a sacred trysting-place,
A bit of consecrated earth
Where love might meet them face to face;
Where eloquence of feet and form
Might spell what dumb lips might not say,
Impetuous as the sun-shot storm
Interpreting the April day.
She raised her speaking face to his,
Beatified, as she began,
Her Vision of the Vista'd Years,
Her Epic of the Race of Man.
She moved a tender, flowery form
Of wondrous contours, in her eyes
The light of love, and on her brow
A peace like Dawn in Paradise.
Like spindrift borne before the gale,
By passion carried to her goal,
She told on winged feet the tale
Of all that Love had taught her soul.
When half her steps were threaded through
She sought, in vain, her lover's glance;
It failed her, and a voice she knew
Cried, "Let us go—she cannot dance."
Her lover went, and like a spring
That fails because its fount is dry,
The great dance lost its rhythmic swing,
The lovely rhythm seemed to die.
A helpless marionette, she lagged
On leaden feet, she raised a hand
To stay the players, her powers flagged—
She could not make them understand.
Ending, she shrank from sight of men
As little hunted creatures cower
Deep into covert; no human ken
Might know the anguish of that hour.
In solitude she sought in vain
Some halm upon her wounds to pour;
Hidden by palms, she probed her pain
Deep and unpitying to its core.
Love, that can only stir the heart
To swifter beat of blood in some,
Had hallowed her to speak through Art
And found her lover's spirit—dumb.
He loved a shoulder's gleam, the glance
Of her swift limbs, her droop and swing,
And yet he could not love the dance
That was her spirit's offering.
So might one love the lips that part
To pour rare notes of music forth,
Yet scorn the singer's lyric art
That deep within her gave them birth.
Since it was so, since Passion bore
A torch to light her to Defeat,
The airs she loved should know no more
The transport of her dancing feet.
Never again might flowers fall
From eager, open palms like rain,
Nor hoarse, contralto voices call,
Begging of her to dance again.
But when her Agony had reigned
The watches of the midnight through,
The sudden solitude regained
Some spell to stir her soul anew.
A last guest left ajar the door
Whose tawdry, well-worn threshold Sin
Had hurried after Beauty o'er,
And Silence, stately, entered in.
Benignantly, the Presence fell
Her tortured being o'er,
Some holy healing in its spell;
The deft feet yearned to dance once more.
No breath of praise should urge her on,
Nor any living thing applaud,
The epic man had dared to scorn
She dedicated to her God.